Laker: We have records from the Day side that stretch back to the 1300s, pretty incredible!

Starting off with the ancestors, what are some stories you think are either funny, worth writing down, or just relevant today?

Meg: I only remember two generations, maybe three. It’s so interesting—maybe because most of my ancestors were here a long time, I have a lot of academics on both sides of my family. And that was kind of a legacy that, in a way, was difficult for me, because I never felt I could live up to them. I'm mostly thinking not about my parents’ generation, but more about the older ones.

I’ll start with my paternal grandfather, Walter Locke, who was really important in my life.

He was a perfect example of the rags-to-riches story that was supposed to be America, because he was born in poverty in West Virginia, very poor, hardly any schooling, read by firelight—read the Bible and McGuffey’s Reader, about all there was. It was kind of like an Elizabethan culture there then. His father decided, when Walter was about eight, to move the family to Nebraska where there was more opportunity. He worked in the quartz mines, and my grandfather, as a kid, worked there too.

But he was able to go to school, all the way through high school. He was clearly very smart. At 16, he wanted to go to university, but he couldn’t because he had kind of ruined his eyes by all that reading by firelight. So instead, he became a teacher. Here’s a story I like: He had at least a five-mile—maybe longer—walk to get to the school he taught at, and he loved nature and being outdoors. Since he couldn’t read for long, what he chose to do was memorize poetry on those long walks. He collected poems and memorized them all his life, and I inherited his poetry book. Later, it was all hand-typed. That’s one of my treasures.

He later became a writer and newspaper editor, first in Lincoln, Nebraska, and then at age 52, the publisher of the Dayton Daily News, James M. Cox, who once ran for President against Harding, invited him to become editor. So, he moved his family to Dayton and purchased—couldn’t have been too expensive then—13 acres of land and built log cabins on them, three of them. One was the main house. Another, called Tranquility, was for him and my grandmother, whom we called Buddy even though her real name was Annette. And the third was his study, called Shadow Shack. 

When we moved to Dayton (I was six), we became very familiar with that property, and that’s when he taught me a lot about nature and about poetry. So, he was a really big influence on me.

And my great aunt—by the time our family moved to Dayton, she was living with my grandparents. Her story is amazing. Her name was Inez Celia Philbrick—my grandmother’s maiden name was Philbrick. Inez was the oldest of five kids. My grandmother Annette was the youngest. There were three boys in between, only one of whom lived into adulthood—his name was Frank.

So, Inez, born in 1866, was one of the first female physicians in this country. We called her Dada, my dad’s babytalk for “doctor.” She ended up practicing as a GP most of her life in Lincoln, Nebraska. She went around by buggy all over, making house calls, and delivering babies. One of my favorite stories is that she delivered all five Sorensen kids—and Ted Sorensen became the chief speechwriter and advisor, along with Bobby, to President Kennedy. So, we had that connection to the Kennedys through my great aunt, my grandparents, and my dad. If we have time, there’s a wonderful story about how the Sorensen and the Locke family became fast friends.

My grandparents had persuaded Dada to retire at 70, and she lived with them for—believe it or not—25 years before she moved with my parents to California. She lived to be 100.

Laker: So we’ve covered Walter Locke and Buddy.

Meg: Here’s a little more about Buddy. When I knew her, she was very reserved, modest, non-assertive. I discovered, however, that before she was married—my grandfather courted her for seven years—she got a master’s from University of Nebraska in Home Ec. She was teaching Home Ec. and she was very active. By the time I knew her, I didn’t know that side of her, and I wish I had talked to her more.

Laker: Much like you, teaching everyone.

Meg: Yeah, teaching. She was a teacher. I had a lot of teachers in my background. So two quick things about Buddy’s parents,  Philetus and Maelah Bracket Philbrick. They were divorced – very unusual. He was a professor of engineering at the University of Iowa. But my mom’s side also included a bunch of academics. The Days were around for many, many generations—it goes back to the Dees in Wales.

Laker: That’s the Dees in Wales, okay. Thank you.

Meg: My great-grandfather, Thomas Day, was a professor at the San Anselmo Seminary in California and was at some point kicked out because he was too liberal for them. I’m proud of that. I think I had a lot of principled ancestors. Anyway, his sons, including my grandfather, George (Grampy to us), had Divinity degrees. By the way, Thomas lived a long time and officiated at my parents’ wedding.

And just a little about my grandmother Ruth Baker Day (Grammy to me). She was the daughter of an academic chemist named Philip—I think that’s right—and if I’m not mistaken, her father was killed in a lab accident, an explosion.

Laker: My goodness.

Meg: Yes, that must have been extremely traumatic. She grew up in Indiana and went to DePauw University. Her mother's family, the Allens, were long-time Americans, but her father's family had emigrated from Germany—probably after 1848, I’m not sure when exactly. She grew up in Greencastle, and her father taught at DePauw, I believe.

Ruth and George married on the late side (he had to work hard to woo her). Soon afterwards, maybe 1912, his International YMCA work took them to Kyiv, then ruled by Russia. Fairly soon she must have gotten pregnant.  At some point in the pregnancy, she asked her mother to come to help out. I only “knew” her as Baba. Well before the due date, George took a group of his student proteges to view a solar eclipse and that’s when the baby decided to come. Only “it” turned out to be twins! As the story goes, George came home a couple of days later to be greeted at the door by Baba with: “George, your eclipse has been eclipsed by the birth of your TWO daughters!” He fainted! 

This was August 19, 1914, about the time the World War I began.  I know that my mother failed to thrive, and they were worried about her, not to mention the War and the political unrest preceding the 1917 Revolution. So, when the twins were just two, Baba, Grammy and the twins left on a train and got the last possible boat out to the US. But at that point George had been charged with being a German spy—falsely of course!—and was imprisoned, I think, or kept by the Russians. It was so ironic because he loved Russia and Russians and spoke fluent Russian. Anyway, he didn’t see his family again for a while. I think the twins were four when he finally got back to California and saw them. 

So again, another set of academics. Both my grandfather George and grandmother Ruth were professors—she in German, he in sociology with an emphasis on Russia.

Oh, and to jump back to the other side, my great-uncle Frank—the one surviving boy—was also an academic. He had both a PhD in history and a law degree. He wrote books, including one about the Western conquest. Someday I’m going to read it. He has his own tragic story, but I won’t get into it. Anyway, it was a very impressive panoply of ancestors.

And the reason I’m telling these stories is because I admire them for resilience, strength of character, being principled—in my world, for good causes. Good principles, good values. They were certainly not perfect, but they had fortitude, dealing with difficult situations well, as far as I can tell. And being loving—especially my maternal Grammy Ruth. My grandmother Buddy was loving too, but I connected more with my grandfather Walter. I knew he loved me, though he was not expressive.

Okay, is that enough for that question?

Laker: I think that’s brilliant on the ancestry side. I have just one follow-up, then let's do the Sorenson story. Why was Ruth Baker Day your most fond grandmother?

Meg: That’s a good question. Well, I had—I felt some kind of connection with her. I didn’t see much of her, because she lived in California and we lived in Ohio. They only visited us once, maybe twice; we visited them three times. So I didn’t really know her, but when we were together, I remember her warmth and love. She called me "Precious." I remember her reading to us—I could read by then, but I loved hearing her read classic books to us. It’s not based on a long in-person history—though she wrote lovely letters; it was just a visceral feeling.

Laker: And how did the Sorensens become such fast friends, aside from being birthed by your great aunt?

Meg: This is a story about my grandfather’s principles and integrity. At that time, he was editor of a farm journal in Lincoln, Nebraska, and he read a story about a student at an evangelical college—Lutheran, I think—a freshman who’d won second place in a national contest for an essay about integrity and open-mindedness in education. The freshman won the prize but was then kicked out of the college for questioning their strict religious orientation.

My grandfather wrote to this young man—his name was Abe Sorensen—and told him he admired him and would like to show him a university and a church that would welcome him; he even offered to put him up in his home if he wanted to come to Lincoln. Abe came; my grandfather got him into the University of Nebraska and introduced him to the Unitarian church. In that church, Abe met a woman named Anna Chaiken, who was Jewish but found a home in the Unitarian congregation. They married and had five kids—the second oldest being Ted Sorensen.

That family became very close with my grandparents. Because of that friendship, I got to work as an intern in Ted Sorensen’s office in the Kennedy administration. So, this is  just one amazing action on my grandfather’s part.

Laker: For the first part we've talked about ancestry. For the second part, we can take it closer to home. Why don’t we spend about 20 minutes talking about you. Then we’ll spend about 10 minutes on advice. To start, what is a memory from your childhood that you feel defined you?

Meg: That’s a very hard question, and I didn’t necessarily realize you meant just childhood, but I’ll start there. For your benefit, I’m determined to be as truthful and honest as I can at this moment in my life. But it’s a bit difficult, because I’m something of a black sheep in this family. 

Laker: You consider yourself the black sheep?

Meg: About certain things, yes. I did think about this question. The first thing isn’t a memory, because I was too young to remember, but I think it was defining.

This was when I was 12 months old. My aunt and uncle were getting married in California—my mother’s twin sister, Margaret. Mom was the matron of honor and they were attending despite the war. My mom wanted to take me, but my dad did not—he wanted to be carefree and have a great time. So they left me, for close to five weeks, in the care of a good friend of theirs who was grandmotherly. I don’t think anything bad happened to me there. 

The defining event: I was left with a near stranger for all that time. I didn’t know my parents were coming back, and I didn’t know why they were gone. I think I must have assumed that something about me was not sufficient. I had a very deep sense of “not good enough.” Not good enough—and I have to show people that I am. Lots of things in my childhood reinforced that–like being punished for innocent mistakes, frequently criticized… I think that defined and limited me, through at least half of my life until… well, you know, inner work and counter experience have finally silenced that voice.

Laker: What about when you were older—were there activities at school or books, or teachers, that were formative?

Meg:  In high school, I was in many committees or clubs—future teachers, foreign affairs—I can’t remember all of them. Oh, I was on the staff of the school paper, and editor senior year. I was also very active in our liberal Congregational church, and I was interested in other religions too.  My senior year I was invited to participate in a Temple Israel group with a Rabbi who was a family friend; his daughter Tressa was there and is still my good friend.

I also played every sport offered. Every season—hockey, volleyball, basketball, softball. I was on every team. We played other teams around the area, different schools. Girls’ sports were quite important in the Midwest, so I was fortunate.

Laker: Were there formative books that you read at that time?

Meg: Yes, though names of specific books escape me at the moment. I brought home books weekly from the public library. I had only two or three good teachers: one in math, one in creative writing and English, and a second-year Latin teacher. The English teacher, Joe Jordan, was probably the most important. He introduced me to Khalil Gibran’s The Prophet, helped me with my valedictory speech, and introduced me to yoga and meditation. And through him and my grandfather Walter Locke, I became interested in Eastern traditions, as well as poetry. Those were very important seeds, and is one reason I wanted you to have a copy of The Prophet.

Laker: I’m interested in the story of how you met Joe, and also your time in Germany.

Meg: Both college and Germany were formative. Wellesley certainly expanded my ability to think, my knowledge and perspective, but it was challenging. I always carried the sense I could never be at the very top like my ancestors, but also a belief I ought to be. I struggled with anxiety.  Even though I had a strong academic record, many good friends and fulfilling activities, I left with less confidence than I’d have liked. 

After college, I got a fellowship to teach in West Berlin at the Sophie Scholl Schule—a Gymnasium. It took courage, but it was hugely freeing and confidence building. There were lots of single women in their twenties and thirties there, perfectly happy not to be married. I realized I didn’t need to rush, either. It opened my eyes to other cultures. I’d also spent a summer with a German family at seventeen and saw them again that year, and I traveled a lot. I probably would have stayed longer if I hadn’t wanted to return to a boyfriend, a PhD math student at Dartmouth, who charmed me with his letters... That didn’t work out, though we stayed friends. 

I returned for a Masters in Teaching at Harvard Graduate School of Education. At that time, there weren’t many acceptable career paths for women. I wasn’t as daring as some friends who became doctors or lawyers, so I went into teaching—that was my heritage, after all. At the time, I thought I was just giving in, but in hindsight, I realize I’m a teacher at heart. I taught high school in Quincy, Massachusetts for three years. After a very hard first year, I really enjoyed it, and I think I was good at it. Much of my later professional work was a form of teaching or education, ending with career and life coaching.

While living in Cambridge, I met your grandfather. Joe and I were “fixed up” by a Wellesley friend, Donna, who was dating Joe's roommate from Harvard, David Oakes, who later became the best man at our wedding.

Laker: Tell the story of the “near miss” with Joe.

Meg: Yes. It was only our third date—a study date. He called to confirm, but I was exhausted from my first-year of high school teaching. Many days, I was so depleted I’d come home, eat dinner, go to bed, and wake up at 3:00 a.m. to prep lessons. That day, I couldn’t imagine going out, so I cancelled. He didn’t believe me and had wanted to show me off at his friend’s birthday party. He thought he’d been ditched and basically wrote me off. I wouldn’t pursue him, and he wouldn’t pursue me. A couple months later, our mutual friend Donna called and asked what happened, I explained, and she cleared it up with Joe. That restarted the whole thing. It took another couple of years until we got married. Thank goodness he hung in there!

Laker: If there’s any story you want to tell before we move to advice, please do.

Meg:  Well, I must mention that marriage and having children were defining decisions in my life, but we’ll have to do a whole new interview for that. Just to say here, I’ve been very fortunate and happy with both my marriage and our sons and their families, but neither marriage nor parenthood has been without challenges and continual growth opportunities.  All in all, a great blessing!

One more thing: I won’t go into detail, but I experienced a lot of death growing up. My best friend died when we were sophomores in high school, another friend’s mother died in third grade, and later in my fifties, many friends as well. Mortality and the meaning of life always interested me. In my early forties, after a long period of agnosticism, I needed something more—a spiritual path. That was challenging to pursue in my family.

But I visited my sister at Kripalu, a yoga center in Lennox, MA, and during a guided meditation I had what I would call a near-death experience—profound, life-changing. It radically shifted my view of life, death, and the afterlife. The last four decades of my life have been deeply influenced by that ongoing spiritual exploration.

Laker: Perfect segue into advice—if you’d like to offer any, for me or just from what you’ve assembled over these decades.

Meg: Yes, I jotted a few things down. Just four things.

Practice and maintain the high emotions. Love, joy, gratitude, awe or reverence, kindness, compassion, generosity. As the poets put it: the good, the true, and the beautiful. That matters, for lots of reasons.

Connect to something larger than yourself. We are part of a whole universe with interconnections to all life.

Stay curious, and open-minded. Curb premature judgment.

Nurture faith in a positive outcome or future, and a desire to serve that in your wonderfully unique way.

Laker: I'm speechless. Would you like to end with a last question?

Meg: Last question.

Laker: The year is 2100. What do you want people to remember about now, or if you are not too scared, about you?

Meg: Oh! Hee-hee. I want them to say, "I didn't believe her, but she was right!"

[raucous laughter]

And by the way, it won't be completed by 2100, but I believe we’ll be well on the way to a much healthier, happier, saner society and world. That's what keeps me going. That's what keeps me hopeful. That's what I want to contribute to in a very age-appropriate way. I'm glad you asked that last question, and it was a spur-of-the-moment answer.

Laker: This was such a pleasure.